In this video we'll learn about some of the concepts terminology and syntax of exception handling and
C++ and then we'll see a simple example that uses exception handling to deal with a divide by zero condition.
Let's start with one exception handling is all about.
First exceptions in C post-purchase should be used only for synchronous code not asynchronous code exception
handling is about dealing with extraordinary situations how we define what an extraordinary situation
is is really dependent on the application and the designer.
We want to be able to detect when an extraordinary situation has occurred or is about to occur so that
we can deal with it.
Again what does deal with it mean.
It depends on the application.
In some cases we'll be able to recover and continue.
But in other cases maybe the only alternative is to terminate the program.
But in this case we can control how we terminate the program.
Perhaps we can close files save as much data as we can and fail soft.
So what can cause these exceptional or extraordinary situations one cause could be insufficient resources.
Maybe we're out of memory or we have no external storage left and we need that to continue.
Another cause is missing resources.
Suppose we need to open and read a file but that file doesn't exist if this file is critical to our
program.
Then we have to decide how we're going to continue if it's even possible invalid operations range violations
under flows and overflows.
There are many many causes for exceptions our programs is said to be exception safe when our code handles
exceptions.
This is very difficult to do completely in C plus plus.
Now let's learn about the terminology used in C++ when we talk about exception handling this terminology
is fairly consistent with many other popular programming languages that you might be familiar with.
However the way it works with C++ tends to be different.
First an exception is an object or a primitive type such as an int a double a boolean and so forth and
it signals that an error condition has occurred in many cases this exception object also contains information
about what happened when your code determines that something is wrong.
Then it can throw an exception object.
Why can't the code just deal with the problem.
Well in some cases it can and it doesn't throw an exception it just handles it itself.
However the more common use cases that the problem is detected in one place in your program.
But that part of the program doesn't know what to do about it.
So it throws an exception and hopes that some other part of the program can deal with it.
That's where ketching and exception comes in some other part of the program could contain the code that
catches the thrown exception and handles it in some cases dealing with this simply means displaying
or logging an error message and terminating the program.
That's OK if the program can't continue and we fail soft in other cases we may be able to handle the
exception recover and continue processing.
For example suppose I want to allocate some memory dynamically but there isn't enough memory available.
The part of our code that allocates the memory would throw an exception since it couldn't allocate any
more memory but it doesn't know what to do.
That in some other part of our program we can catch this exception and maybe we can clear out some buffers
or caches and then release some memory and then try to allocate it again.
Now let's see the keywords that C++ uses to achieve exception handling in C++.
We use three keywords to work with exception handling.
These are throe.
Try and catch the throw key word is used to throw an exception object or primitive type and it's usually
followed by an argument which is the exception that we're throwing the try keyword is followed by a
code block in curly braces.
The code in the code block is code that could potentially throw an exception.
So we place that code in the try block.
If the code does not throw an exception then the code executes as normal.
However if the code in the try block throws an exception then the rest of the code in the block does
not execute and C++ looks for a block of code that can handle that thrown exception.
That's the catch block which is the catch keyword followed by the type of exception object that it handles.
It also has a code block where the code that handles the exception executes catch blocks only execute
if an exception is thrown and the type of the thrown exception matches the parameter in the catch block.
We can write multiple catch handlers that expect different types of exceptions.
The best way to understand exception handling is to really just look at some examples.
Let's start with a very simple example that divides by zero.
Here we have a code snippet that divides some by total and stores the result in average.
Let's assume that sum and total have been declared and initialized.
So what happens when total is zero.
Does the program crash.
Do we get an undefined result.
The answer is yes to all of them.
It really depends because the result of a division by zero depends on the types of the arguments in
the division operation.
Integer divide by zero and floating point divide by zero may provide different result.
We'll see this in a minute in the ID.
Regardless we can't let that statement ex-secret So what do we do.
Well that's pretty easy.
We check to see if total is zero and if it is we owe it to the division and if it is not equal to zero
we go ahead with the division.
That's pretty easy.
The harder question is what do we do in total is equal to zero.
Well that totally depends on the application.
And this question becomes much more difficult if this code existed in a function and that function calculates
and returns the average.
What are we return from that function if total is zero.
So we can use exception handling to deal with the situation.
This is an example to show you the syntax for exception handling.
You wouldn't write code like this since we could print an error message easily with a simple if else
statements in the previous slide.
But let's look at this code together.
Again let's assume that sum total and average have been declared and initialized.
First we have a try block inside the code in the try block.
We write code that could potentially throw an exception in this case if total equals zero.
We throw an exception the type of the exception in this example is an integer and we set it to zero.
Best practice is to throw objects not primitives but we'll get to throwing objects.
Let's first look at the case where total is not equal to zero.
In this case the try block executes the division occurs and we can use the average in the try block
is normal when the code in the tribe what completes we transfer control to the last statement that displays
program continues.
Notice that the catch block does not fire since no exception was thrown.
OK now let's suppose that total is equal to zero.
Now the code in the try block throws zero no further code in that try block is executed.
So the divide by zero does not happen.
Now we transfer control to a catch handler that expects an exception object of the same type as the
one we threw.
In this case an integer the code in the catch block now executes.
And when it's done we transfer control to the last statement that displays program continues again.
Notice that we prevented that divide by zero error and we handled it in a controlled manner.
Now let's head over to the idea and we'll see this example in action.
OK so I'm back in the code like ID.
I mean the Section 18 workspace and then the MPG project mpg stands for miles per gallon and that's
what we're going to calculate.
Apologies to my kilometers per liter friends out there.
So what do we do.
We've got Miles we've got gallons we're going to ask the user for those two values they're both integers
and then we're going to calculate miles per gallon which is a double.
Pretty straightforward stuff that we've done already.
So in this case notice on line 15 here I'm calculating miles per gallon equals miles divided by gallons.
Now there's a problem here we're going to get some truncation because you can see that Miles right here
and gallons are both integer.
So this is going to be integer division and we're going to truncate the the decimal part right.
But the reason I'm doing it this way is to show you the error that happens when you do integer division
by zero.
OK.
So but before we do that let's run this with just some normal data.
So let's say we have 13 miles and three gallons.
Our result is four you can see it's not four point something because we're doing integer division but
that's ok we can fix that in a minute.
Now let's do a division by zero and see what happens.
So I'm going to run this again and let's say I put in 13 and this time I put in 0 for gallons.
Now when I press Enter it's going to try to divide 13 by 0 and it's going to crash.
So I pressed Enter.
There's the crash on Windows.
I'll cancel that.
I closed the program and I'll terminate this program.
We don't want to crash.
OK.
Now if I comment this out and we do a division by zero with a floating point number and what we're doing
here is what we did a while back in the course where we had a static cast.
Remember these are both integers right here Miles and gallons.
So I really don't want to do integer division so I just need to make one of them a double and then double
division will occur.
So I'm statically casting miles to a double I could have statically cast had gallons or both of them.
So in this case we're doing double division and the behavior is different here and I'll show you why.
Let me run this again.
OK so let's.
Again let's do something valid let's say 130 divided by 30 gallons.
Result is forty three point three miles per gallon.
That's fine.
Now let's do it with zero.
So I'll get a 123 this time is 0 gallons so we're going to get a divide by zero here.
We're not going to crash though.
You can see that the result that Prince is infinity and that's the standard and C plus plus when you
do floating point division by zero.
If I run this again and I enter negative for miles and obviously we would have to do checks for all
of this stuff and zero and I'll get a negative infinity.
You can see that result right here.
And the last thing if we type 0 0 0 divided by zero we get not a number.
And that's the error that you see here.
All those are bad outcomes.
We really don't want those.
So the easy fix is not to execute line 16 if gallons is equal to zero.
Right.
It's really that simple.
So let's do that to an IF statement if gallons is not equal to zero
then we do want to execute this code right.
We're safe
and we'll use an else statement here.
C-code light puts an extra Kerley in there for me.
So.
Else we've got an error.
So we want to display the error and what we'll do is we haven't used standard error or see error yet.
It's another output stream that's pretty much reserved for error messages or error logging.
And I'll talk about that a little bit more when we talk about file IO by default sea air.
Is your console just like sea out.
So we should see this on the screen and we'll do an end line here.
OK.
So far so good.
Like Again nothing we haven't done before but in this case which is handling this error and we're not
using exception handling here we're just using our regular old logic to handle the air.
So let me run this and say 130 miles by zero.
Now we should have Sorry can't divide by zero.
Right.
Just like one would expect.
OK so now let's rewrite this program so that we use exception handling and what we'll do is we'll load
the MPG exception project right here and I'll load that and I'll be right back.
OK so I loaded the MPG exception project in the section 18 workspace and you can see that right now
is has no exception handling and it has no if else logic either.
Now here's the commented code that does does the integer division I'm just going to get rid of that
because I really don't want to clutter up.
And I'm still doing our floating point division here.
So what do we do to get exception handling working here.
Well we have to have a try block.
So we're going to say right here try to execute this code and I'm going to wrap this code up right here
inside the try and all indent this.
So what we do here is we try to execute code that could potentially throw an exception.
And when do we throw the exception will we throw the exception of gallons is equal to zero.
So let's do that right in here I'm going to say if gallons is equal to zero that's where I want to throw
and what do I throw an exception could be anything it could be an integer or a character or a pointer
or an object.
Right here we're just going to throw an integer.
Later on we'll use objects.
It's best practice is to use objects.
But let's just use an integer here so it's easy to understand.
So what do I want to throw I could throw any integer I could throw zero right.
I could throw gallons I could do anything I want.
But let's just throw zero.
Now what happens if gallons is equal to zero.
Then we're throwing this zero if gallons is not equal to zero then our code executes as normal.
But what if we do throw this zero here if we do throw this exception right here this piece of code here
is not executed at all.
Ok totally skipped.
And then what happens is that the C++ system is looking for that exception that was just thrown.
If you don't catch it then the program will terminate.
But if you catch it then you can deal with it.
So how do you catch it while you catch it using a catch block and you can put that right here.
I'll say catch.
And what's the type of the exception we want to catch.
In this case it's an integer and you always want to catch by reference.
That's the best practice.
Name this thing any thing you want we really aren't going to use it.
And now whatever code we want to execute in here is what's going to happen when the error is thrown
when the exception is thrown.
And I'm just going to paste that same see error message that I had earlier.
OK so now again let's walk through this with you really carefully because when the next few videos it'll
get a little bit more complicated.
So here's my try block.
You can see it between lines 15 and 20.
And here's my catch handler right here my catch block.
I tend to use both names synonymously.
So again if the user entered zero we throw it right.
This code is not executed thankfully otherwise we'd have a divide by zero right here.
We try to catch an integer if there is a catch block but it doesn't catch an integer or even if there's
no catch block then we've got our program will terminate.
Right on the spot.
In this case it will because we're right in our man then if we do throw 0 and we do have a catch handler
for it we'll catch it right here.
Now I could print out the X if I wanted to write and will print 0.
That's what was thrown here.
That's what this guy is right here.
That's the object that was thrown the exception.
So in this case there's my catch handler.
In either case my program will not crash because.
Let me walk again right through me clear this and this.
If I do throw an exception it's handled here.
If I don't throw an exception it's handled here.
In both cases this line will execute.
My program will continue.
Normally it won't crash.
All right.
So let's give this a run and say 130 and we'll do zero again.
Sorry you can't divide by zero sorry exception is being handled.
Now you might ask.
So what.
Same thing I could've done with an if statement.
Yes and this is not typically the way that we do exception handling this is just showing you the syntax
and what's going on.
Usually we do the exception handling when a function throws an exception and that function has no idea
what to do with it.
And we catch that exception somewhere else and that's what we're going to go into the next few videos.
OK I'll see you there.